### the BIG PICTURE

One of the most interesting aspects of the world of mathematics is the existence of **conjectures**, assertions which many think may be true but which no one is able to prove—or disprove. Many famous conjectures are or were in the realm of number theory.

An early instance was the conjecture of Mersenne in the mid-1600's that all integers of the form $2^{2^n} + 1$, called **Mersenne numbers**, are prime. It looks true for the first few $n$: $n = 1$ yields 5; $n = 2$ yields 17; $n = 3$, 257. (Can you verify that 257 is prime?) The fourth Mersenne number, $2^{16} + 1$, is also prime; with no computers to do the complicated calculations, this was as high as anyone could go. However, in the mid-1700's Leonhard Euler was able to find an explicit factor of $2^{32} + 1$, the fifth Mersenne number, and the conjecture was proved false.

Other conjectures were more fortunate; many live on to this day. Christian Goldbach conjectured in the early 1700's that every even integer greater than 4 could be written as the sum of two primes. (For example, $6 = 3 + 3$, $8 = 5 + 3$, $36 = 19 + 17$, and $200 = 97 + 103$.) **Goldbach's conjecture**, as it has come to be called, is to this day an open question. The most powerful computers have been unable to find a counterexample, and the best mathematicians have been unable to prove it. Steps have been made toward a proof, and some feel it is in sight, but that is as far as it goes.

The most famous conjecture of all time was also in the field of number theory. **Fermat's Last Theorem** haunted mathematicians (and amateur solvers, who have flooded publications with bogus "proofs") for centuries. In 1993, Andrew Wiles, a professor at Princeton University, finally finished the theorem off, but he required seven years' unremitting labor, as well as a very large body of supporting work by others, to do it. Old conjectures die hard.
